---
noteID: e9ac93d2-1f9f-4a72-9e94-1630746f2d5a
---

#### Synchronous blocking
With a synchronous blocking call, a microservice sends a call of some kind to a downstream process (likely another microservice) and blocks until the call has com‐ pleted, and potentially until a response has been received. The main challenge with synchronous calls is the inherent temporal coupling. Microservice needs to be reachable for the call to work. If the upstream instance has subsequently died, the response will get lost.

#### Asynchronous Non blocking
With asynchronous communication, the act of sending a call out over the network doesn’t block the microservice issuing the call. It is able to carry on with any other processing without having to wait for a response.Nonblocking asynchronous com‐ munication comes in many forms
- **Communication through common data** : The upstream microservice changes some common data, which one or more microservices later make use of. one microservice puts data into a defined location, and another microservice (or potentially multiple microservi‐ ces) then makes use of the data. It can be as simple as one microservice dropping a file in a location, and at some point later on another microservice picks up that file and does something with it. Not useful in low latency situations as continuous polling is required.
- **Request-response** : A microservice sends a request to another microservice asking it to do some‐ thing. When the requested operation completes, whether successfully or not, the upstream microservice receives the response asynchronously (say a queue). Specifically, any instance of the upstream microservice should be able to handle the response.
- **Event-driven interaction** : A microservice broadcasts an event, which can be thought of as a factual state‐ ment about something that has happened. Other microservices can listen for the events they are interested in and react accordingly.

The microservices that receive the call do not need to be reachable at the same time the call is made. This means we avoid the concerns of temporal decoupling. This style of communication is also beneficial if the functionality being triggered by a call will take a long time to process.
